SHIELDS AESTHETICS WEBSITE SYSTEM PRESENTATION OVERVIEW

1. System Overview

Shields Aesthetics is a Django-based clinic appointment and management website.
It supports three main user roles: Patient, Secretary, and Doctor. The system
lets patients book appointments, lets clinic staff schedule appointments for
patients, and lets doctors manage clinical sessions, patient notes, users, and
sales reports.

The website is connected to GitHub and deployed on Render. Render runs the
Django project using Gunicorn, applies database migrations during deployment,
and serves the application through the WSGI entry point.


2. Main Technologies Used

Backend framework:
Django 6.0.4

Programming language:
Python 3.12.1

Database:
PostgreSQL in production or local development when configured through .env.
The project also supports DATABASE_URL through dj-database-url, which is common
for Render and other cloud platforms.

Frontend:
Django templates, HTML, CSS, JavaScript, HTMX-style partial loading in selected
pages, Font Awesome icons, and responsive mobile styling.

Static file handling:
WhiteNoise is used for static files in production.

Image handling:
Pillow supports uploaded service images and user profile photos.

Admin interface:
Django admin is customized with django-jazzmin.

Deployment:
Render runs:
python manage.py migrate --noinput && gunicorn core.wsgi:application


3. Important Project Folders and Files

manage.py
The Django command runner used for migrations, tests, checks, and local server
startup.

core/
The main Django project configuration folder.

core/settings.py
Contains installed apps, middleware, database settings, static and media file
settings, security settings, Jazzmin admin customization, and login redirects.

core/urls.py
Maps browser URLs to view functions. This is where patient, doctor, secretary,
admin, API, appointment, and profile routes are registered.

clinic/
The main application folder containing the business logic.

clinic/models.py
Defines the database models: Service, Profile, PatientProfileAudit, and
Appointment.

clinic/views.py
Contains the system behavior: login, registration, dashboards, appointment
booking, session management, profile updates, patient search, quick
registration, doctor notes, sales reports, and API endpoints.

clinic/templates/clinic/
Contains the HTML templates for each page, including dashboards, booking pages,
 session pages, profile pages, patient details, login, registration, and shared
base layouts.

clinic/tests.py
Contains automated tests for role access, booking restrictions, staff and
patient flows, search, dashboard access, doctor notes, and model table names.

static/
Contains static assets such as the favicon, logo, and website images.

requirements.txt
Lists Python packages needed by the project.

Procfile
Tells Render how to start the web application.

.env.example
Documents the environment variables needed for local or production setup.


4. Main Database Models

Service
Stores the clinic treatment catalog. Each service has a name, category,
description, price, and optional uploaded image. Categories include facial
treatments, ZO professional facials, doctor procedures, laser gynecology, and
add-on treatments.

Profile
Extends Django's built-in User model. It stores the user's role, phone number,
profile image, doctor ID, or employee ID. It automatically generates display IDs
such as #SA-0001 for patients, DOC-0001 for doctors, and EMP-0001 for
secretaries.

PatientProfileAudit
Records important profile changes, especially username and email changes. This
helps with accountability and tracking.

Appointment
Stores appointments and treatment sessions. Each appointment belongs to a
patient and service, can include an add-on service, stores date, time, notes,
status, clinic location, specialist, reference number, booking price, and doctor
notes. Status values are Pending, Confirmed, Completed, and Cancelled.


5. User Roles

Patient
Patients can register, log in, view their dashboard, book appointments, view
their treatment history, cancel eligible appointments, and update their profile
and password.

Secretary
Secretaries can access a staff dashboard, manually register patients, schedule
appointments for patients, search patients, view patient information, confirm
appointments, complete appointments, cancel appointments, and monitor clinic
sessions.

Doctor
Doctors can access everything needed for clinical management: dashboard,
session management, patient details, doctor notes, sales reports, and user role
management. Doctors can also confirm, complete, or cancel appointments.

Admin/Superuser
The Django admin site manages services, appointments, profiles, and uploaded
images. Jazzmin is used to make the admin interface cleaner and branded.


6. How the Appointment Flow Works

Patient booking flow:
1. A patient logs in or registers.
2. The patient opens the booking page.
3. The patient selects a service, optional add-on, date, time, and notes.
4. The system validates the appointment date and time.
5. Sundays are blocked as rest days.
6. Appointments must be booked at least one hour ahead.
7. The system checks if the patient already booked the same slot.
8. If valid, the appointment is created with Pending status.
9. A unique TRN reference number is generated.

Staff scheduling flow:
1. A secretary or doctor opens the staff schedule appointment page.
2. Staff can search for an existing patient or quickly register a new patient.
3. Staff selects the service, add-on, date, time, and notes.
4. The same booking validations are applied.
5. The appointment is created and the staff member is redirected to manage
sessions.

Appointment status lifecycle:
Pending means the appointment has been requested or created but not confirmed.
Confirmed means staff has confirmed the appointment.
Completed means the treatment session has already happened.
Cancelled means the appointment was cancelled and the slot is released.


7. Main Features

Public homepage:
The homepage introduces Shields Aesthetics and shows service categories. The
"Set Appointment" button changes depending on the user. Guests go to the
contact section, patients go to patient booking, and staff go to the staff
scheduler.

Authentication:
Users can register, log in, and log out. After login, users are redirected based
on role: patient dashboard, secretary dashboard, or doctor dashboard.

Patient dashboard:
Shows the patient's completed sessions count, upcoming appointment, and recent
appointment activity.

Patient booking:
Patients can select services, choose dates and time slots, add notes, and submit
appointments.

Patient sessions:
Patients can view treatment history, search sessions, see status badges, and
cancel appointments when allowed.

Profile management:
Users can update their name, username, email, phone number, profile image, and
password. After a successful update, the profile page refreshes so the newest
details appear immediately.

Secretary dashboard:
Shows clinic activity such as total appointments, pending work, today's
appointments, weekly totals, completed sessions, and upcoming appointments.

Doctor dashboard:
Shows appointment summaries, upcoming schedules, today and tomorrow's patients,
and clinic work indicators.

Manage sessions:
Doctors and secretaries can filter sessions by status, search by patient,
service, TRN, or patient ID, and filter by date. They can confirm, complete, or
cancel appointments using confirmation popups that work on desktop and mobile.

Patient details:
Doctors and secretaries can view patient contact information, appointment
summary, upcoming appointments, and appointment history.

Doctor notes:
Doctors can open patient details from session management and save private
clinical notes for an appointment.

Sales report:
Doctors can view completed appointment revenue, daily sales, weekly sales,
monthly sales, completed session counts, service breakdown, top treatments, and
trend data.

User management:
Doctors can view user profiles, filter by role, search users, and change roles
between Patient, Secretary, and Doctor.

Notifications:
Staff pages receive notification counts for pending future appointments. This
helps staff notice new appointment requests.

Responsive mobile design:
The system includes mobile layout fixes for booking pages, profile forms,
tables, search bars, modals, and session action confirmation popups.


8. Validation and Business Rules

Phone numbers:
Philippine mobile numbers must follow the format 09XXXXXXXXX.

Duplicate patient protection:
The system checks for repeated patient names combined with matching contact
details. It also prevents duplicate email or phone conflicts for patients.

Appointment availability:
Cancelled appointments do not block future availability. Pending and Confirmed
appointments block the selected date and time.

Sunday restriction:
Sundays are treated as rest days and cannot be booked.

Lead time:
Appointments must be booked at least one hour in advance.

Completed sessions:
Session counters are based on completed appointments. This means the displayed
"completed sessions" number represents treatments that were actually finished.


9. Security and Access Control

Role-based access:
Each major view checks the current user's role before allowing access. Patients
cannot access doctor or secretary dashboards. Secretaries cannot access
doctor-only pages such as sales and user management.

CSRF protection:
Django CSRF protection is used for forms and POST actions.

No-cache protected pages:
The NoStoreAuthenticatedMiddleware adds no-cache headers to protected pages so
browser history does not show private pages after logout.

Secure production settings:
The project supports secure cookies, HTTPS redirect, HSTS, trusted CSRF origins,
and allowed hosts through environment variables.

Password security:
Django's built-in password validators and PasswordChangeForm are used for
account security.


10. APIs Used by the Frontend

/check-availability/
Returns unavailable time slots for a selected date.

/api/search-patients/
Lets staff search patients by name, email, username, phone, or patient ID.

/api/quick-register-patient/
Lets staff quickly create a patient account and receive temporary credentials.

/api/service/<service_id>/
Returns service details such as category, price, description, image, and
estimated duration.

/api/patient/<patient_id>/
Returns patient details for staff popups.

/api/doctor-notes/<appointment_id>/get/
Returns doctor notes for a selected appointment.

/api/doctor-notes/<appointment_id>/save/
Saves private doctor notes.

/api/notifications/poll/
Returns pending appointment notification data for staff.


11. Deployment Notes

The project is designed for Render deployment. The Procfile runs migrations
before starting Gunicorn. Environment variables control secrets, database
connection, allowed hosts, CSRF trusted origins, debug mode, and security
settings.

Uploaded media such as profile photos and service images should use persistent
storage in production. The README recommends setting MEDIA_ROOT to a persistent
Render disk, for example /var/data/media, so uploaded images are not lost after
redeploys or restarts.


12. Testing

The project includes Django tests that verify:
Role-based access control.
No-cache behavior after logout.
Legacy staff scheduling URLs redirect correctly.
Staff search works with TRN and patient IDs.
Booking rejects Sundays and appointments less than one hour away.
Quick patient registration returns temporary credentials.
Patient booking and dashboard flow works.
Homepage appointment links change by role.
Secretary dashboard and manual registration flow works.
Doctor detail, notes, sales, and user management pages work.
Database model table names are readable and consistent.


13. Presentation Summary

In simple terms, Shields Aesthetics is a role-based clinic management website.
Patients use it to book and track appointments. Secretaries use it to schedule
and manage patient sessions. Doctors use it to review patient details, manage
treatment sessions, write notes, view sales, and control user roles. The system
uses Django, PostgreSQL, Django templates, JavaScript, and Render deployment to
provide a complete appointment workflow from booking to confirmation,
completion, cancellation, and reporting.
